<html><body> <p>American textbooks usually portray Nazis as psychopaths in uniform. 
But the reality was far more horrifying — ordinary German citizens 
carried out most of the tasks that made the Holocaust possible.</p>
<p>Historians <a href="http://www.nytimes.com/books/00/02/20/reviews/000220.20gewent.html?mcubz=1">point out</a>
 that &quot;the inefficient and overburdened Nazi regime depended on the 
support, indeed the active collaboration, of the citizenry for its 
survival&quot;. They argue that it was more bottom-up than top-down, pointing
 to Hitler’s widespread popularity and to the depressingly few instances
 of overt resistance as evidence. This apparatus of terror may have 
centered on the Gestapo, but it depended on the compliance of German 
citizens.</p>
<p>These &quot;ordinary&quot; individuals took part for reasons that were far more
 complex. Some wanted to gain social status, while others simply feared 
they would be shot if they did not comply. Still others welcomed the 
strong national bond with their ethnic group after decades of misery and
 global humiliation.</p>
<p>Others didn’t even fully realize what was happening until it was too 
late. In the beginning, many of the acts encouraged by the Gestapo 
seemed justified, or at least justifiable. They started by cracking down
 on political extremists. The focus on Socialists and Communists gave 
onlookers plausible deniability. These people posed a direct threat to 
the state, and some were violent, so few questioned the Gestapo’s right 
to use force to stop them.</p>
	<p>The Gestapo then targeted Jehovah’s Witnesses, because they were 
unwilling to accept the authority of the military. This seemed like a 
natural extension of the earlier persecution of political extremists, so
 again the injustice was mostly overlooked. Sure, the Witnesses insisted
 that they were apolitical, but they refused to give the Nazi salute, to
 allow their children to join the Hitler Youth, or to be drafted, so 
they threatened the stability of the Reich.</p>
<p>Trade unionists were next. The labor movement exercised significant 
political power, representing a barrier to Nazi control over all areas 
of life. Again, the regime met little resistance from its citizenry. 
From there, the Gestapo continued to expand their reach. Over time, they
 rounded up groups for whom the argument that they might threaten the 
Reich was increasingly tenuous, but by then it was too late. The Nazis 
had consolidated their power.</p>
<p>By &quot;methodically singling out particular groups of victims and going 
after them with every pretense of legality&quot;, the Nazis’ incrementally 
increasing atrocities <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boiling_frog#As_metaphor">boiled the frog</a>.
 The Gestapo began their repression by targeting those who were most 
widely considered criminals and trouble makers. It was hard to disagree 
with that. And even if you did disagree, it wasn’t exactly a popular 
cause to support them. By the time innocent women and children were 
being rounded up, the German populace was already in too deep. Not only 
had repression been normalized, but any who did recognize the horrific 
reality stood little chance of reversing the momentum working in favor 
of the regime.</p>
	<p>III. Psychological framing</p>
<p>There is a lot of interesting research on how framing affects decision-making around ethical questions.</p>
<p>In <a href="https://www.jstor.org/stable/2667052?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents">one study</a>
 out of Cornell University, researchers found that framing can affect 
the type of decision a person perceives (s)he is making. This can cause 
people to overlook the ethical dimensions of their decision. Max 
Bazerman and Ann Tenbrunsel <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/21/opinion/21bazerman.html?mcubz=1">describe</a> the study:</p><blockquote><p>Participants
 were asked to play the role of a manufacturer in an industry known for 
emitting toxic gas... The manufacturers had reached a voluntary but 
costly agreement to run equipment that would limit ... toxic emissions. 
Some participants were told they would face modest financial sanctions 
if they broke the agreement; others were told they would face no 
sanctions if they did.</p></blockquote><blockquote><p>An economic analysis would predict that the threat of sanctions would increase compliance with the agreement. Instead, participants
 who faced a potential fine cheated more, not less, than those who faced
 no sanctions. With no penalty, the situation was construed as an 
ethical dilemma; the penalty caused individuals to view the decision as a
 financial one.</p></blockquote><p>In <a href="http://www.people.hbs.edu/mbazerman/Papers/Gino-Baz-06-007-Slippery%20Slopes.pdf">another study</a>,
 Harvard researchers found evidence that people are more likely to 
accept increasingly major infractions &quot;as long as each violation is only
 incrementally more serious than the preceding one&quot;. At the same time, people are more likely to recognize and stop unethical behavior of the same magnitude when the change is &quot;abrupt&quot;.</p>
	<p>And <a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2266485">another study</a>
 out of Case Western found that in interpersonal conflicts, the victim 
and perpetrator have different subjective interpretations. Charles 
Stangor <a href="https://opentextbc.ca/socialpsychology/chapter/biases-in-attribution/">described</a> this study and the tendency for individuals to judge others more harshly and conclusively than themselves:</p><blockquote><p>The
 researchers analyzed the accounts people gave of an experience they 
identified where they angered someone else (i.e. when they were the 
perpetrator of a behavior leading to an unpleasant outcome) and another 
one where someone else angered them (i.e. they were the victim).</p></blockquote><blockquote><p>The differences in attributions made in these two situations were considerable. When accounting for themselves as perpetrators, people tended to emphasize situational factors
 to describe their behavior as an isolated incident that was a 
meaningful, understandable response to the situation, and to assert that
 the action caused no lasting harm. When they were the victims, on
 the other hand, they explained the perpetrator’s behavior by focusing 
on the presumed character defects of the person and by describing
 the behavior as an arbitrary and senseless action, taking place in an 
ongoing context of abusive behavior that caused lasting harm to them as 
victims.</p></blockquote>
	<p>We’ve all seen this kind of inconsistent behavior. Just yesterday 
when I was biking down the street, a car nearly ran me over as it made a
 turn. I was pissed — what an idiot for not checking his blind spot! 
That’s one of the first things you learn about right hand turns! But if I
 think about it, I realize that I’ve made that exact mistake before 
while driving, resulting in a near-miss with a cyclist. I didn’t drive 
away thinking that I was an idiot driver. Rather, the thought was &quot;Thank
 goodness that one-time mistake didn’t turn out badly… maybe I should 
get some coffee on my way to class, I guess I must be tired&quot;.</p>
<p>These examples are <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illusory_truth_effect">just</a> <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bias_blind_spot">the</a> <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Choice-supportive_bias">tip</a> <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confirmation_bias">of</a> <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contrast_effect">the</a> <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunning%E2%80%93Kruger_effect">iceberg</a>.
 There are so many ways we can trick ourselves into evaluating 
equivalent ethical decisions differently. Our evaluation can change 
depending on who is responsible, the context in which it happened, and 
what our reference points were. Of course these effects do not absolve 
the decision maker of his responsibility, but they are often disregarded
 when we judge history. These judgements then constrain the range of 
ethical actions of which we perceive ourselves to be capable, misleading
 ourselves into thinking we could never do terrible things.</p>
	<p>IV. Evil mastermind</p>
	<p>Most suffering is not inflicted by an evil mastermind. When things go wrong, it’s usually because regular people take part.
 We underestimate how misguided intentions, counterproductive framing, 
and imperfect information can lead an ordinary person to do 
extraordinarily bad things.</p>
<p>History is messy, especially while it’s happening. If we simplify the
 story and write off those involved as lone villains, we risk making the
 same mistakes. When we view events as a simple morality play, we lose our ability to learn from the past.</p>
<p>We are all capable of behaving profoundly unethically, even when our 
intentions are good. It’s too easy to dismiss people who do bad things 
as corrupt or malicious. It’s important to remember that given the right
 set of circumstances, we too might make wrong choices.</p>
<p>History is too often reduced to stories of good versus evil. We get 
the impression that we are somehow different from the people who were 
bad, and we take for granted that we would never make similar choices. We
 should learn to empathize with those who make terrible choices — not to
 pardon their choices nor to deny ourselves the right to grieve, but to 
recognize when we might be heading down a similar path. If we see them as people and understand where they went wrong, we can avoid making the same mistakes.</p></body></html>